docs: update cryptographic equivocation verification ADR (#1168)
cosmos/interchain-security: docs/docs/adrs/adr-005-cryptographic-equivocation-verification.md

> Currently, we use a governance proposal to slash validators for equivocation (double signing and light client attacks). This has the downside that it takes 2 weeks for the proposal to be approved, effectively reducing the unbonding period in some respects. This does not lead to any pressing real-world security concerns, but since it involves the basis of proof of stake, it would be good to get consumer chain slashing back to parity as soon as possible.

Reviewer: I updated the entire paragraph

multiple nodes, called primary and witness nodes. 

Light clients download new headers committed on chain from a primary. Headers can be verified in two ways: sequentially,
where the block height of headers is serial, or using skipping. This second verification method allows light clients to download headers
with nonconsecutive block height, where some intermediate headers are skipped (see [Tendermint Light Client, Figure 1 and Figure 3](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.07031.pdf)).
Additionally, light clients are cross-checking new headers obtained from a primary with witnesses to ensure all nodes share the same state.

A light client attack occurs when a Byzantine validator sends invalid headers to a light client.
As the light client doesn't execute transactions, it can be deceived into trusting corrupted application state transitions.
For instance, if a light client receives header `A` from the primary and header `B` from a witness for the same block height `H`,
and both headers are successfully verified, it indicates a light client attack.
Note that in this case, either the primary or the witness or both are malicious.

> To orchestrate a light client attack, Byzantine actors create a header with incorrect state transitions that must be signed by ⅓+ of the voting power.

Reviewer 2: should be signed by > 2/3rd voting power

Light clients are a core component of IBC. In the event of a light client attack, IBC relayers notify the affected chains by submitting an [IBC misbehavior message]((https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/2b7c969066fbcb18f90c7f5bd256439ca12535c7/proto/ibc/lightclients/tendermint/v1/tendermint.proto#L79)).
A misbehavior message includes the conflicting headers that constitute a `LightClientAttackEvidence`. Upon receiving such a message,
a chain will first verify whether these headers would have convinced its light client. This verification is achieved by checking
the header states against the light client consensus states (see [IBC misbehaviour handler](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/2b7c969066fbcb18f90c7f5bd256439ca12535c7/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/types/misbehaviour_handle.go#L101)). If the misbehaviour is successfully verified, the chain will then "freeze" the
light client, halting any further trust in or updating of its states.

## Decision

In the first iteration of the feature, we will introduce a new endpoint: `HandleConsumerMisbehaviour(ctx sdk.Context, misbehaviour ibctmtypes.Misbehaviour)`.

> The main idea is to leverage the current IBC misbehaviour handling and update it to solely jail and slash the validators that

Reviewer 3: Am I understanding things correctly below?

The original IBC misbehavior handling is relevant to evidence submitted to a chain, where the misbehavior happened on that same chain. In ICS we're reusing that code to handle misbehavior evidence on the provider, where the misbehavior happened on a different chain (the consumer). 

If my understanding is correct, it might be worth adding a couple sentences explaining how ICS's use of the IBC misbehavior handling is different than how it's conventionally used

Reviewer: I'll let @sainoe to address this comment.

Author: @smarshall-spitzbart IBC misbehaviour handling serves as a security mechanism to protect a chain that runs the client of another chain. For instance, let's say that chain `A` runs a client of chain `B`. If chain `B` were to send invalid states to chain `A`, it becomes necessary that chain `A` stops trusting the client of chain `B`. This can be achieved by submitting an IBC misbehavior message to chain `A`, which will halt the client if successfully executed.

In the context of ICS, we're uniquely reusing the IBC misbehavior message verification methods. The message handling behaviour, however, differs from the IBC implementation as it involves jailing validators and refrains from modifying the client states.

Reviewer 3: Got it, all makes sense 👍, this info is prob worth adding to the ADR imo

> performed a light client attack. This update will be made under the assumption that the chains connected via this light client

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
performed a light client attack. This update will be made under the assumption that the chain connected via this light client
```

share the same validator set, as it is the case with Replicated Security. 

> This endpoint will reuse the IBC client libraries to verify that the misbehaviour headers would have fool the light client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This endpoint will reuse the IBC client libraries to verify that the misbehaviour headers would have fooled the light client.
```

Additionally, it’s crucial that the endpoint logic result in the slashing and jailing of validators under the same conditions
as a light client agent detector. Therefore, the endpoint will ensure that the two conditions are met:
the headers in the misbehaviour message have the same block height, and
the light client isn’t expired.

After having successfully verified a misbehaviour, the endpoint will execute the jailing and slashing of the malicious validators similarly as in the evidence module. 

### Current limitations:

- This only handles light client attacks, not double signing. In the future, we will add the code to also verify double signing.

- We cannot derive an infraction height from the evidence, so it is only possible to tombstone validators, not actually slash them.
To explain the technical reasons behind this limitation, let's recap the initial consumer initiated slashing logic.
In a nutshell, consumer heights are mapped to provider heights through VSCPackets, namely through the so called vscIDs.
When an infraction occurs on the consumer, a SlashPacket containing the vscID obtained from mapping the consumer infraction height

> is sent to the provider. Upon receiving the packet, the provider maps the consumer infraction height to a local infraction height,

Reviewer 2: Are these SlashPackets being currently sent? Or is this in theory if we assume "trusted" consumer chains?

Author: Yes they're sent but only for downtime infractions atm.

which is used to slash the misbehaving validator. In the context of untrusted consumer chains, all their states, including vscIDs,

> could be corrupted and the ore cannot be used for slashing purposes.

Reviewer 2: typo?
```suggestion
could be corrupted and cannot be used for slashing purposes.
```
So you cannot find the provider height from the consumer height?

Author: >
```suggestion
could be corrupted and therefore cannot be used for slashing purposes.
```

> - Currently, the endpoint can only handle "equivocation" light client attacks. This is because the "lunatic" attacks require the endpoint to possess the ability to dissociate which header is conflicted or trusted upon receiving a misbehavior message. Without this information, it's not possible to define the Byzantine validators from the conflicting headers (see [comment](https://github.com/cosmos/interchain-security/pull/826#discussion_r1268668684)).

Reviewer 2: I don't think I understand this, maybe you can clarify. What does "the ability to dissociate which header is conflicted or trusted" mean? For the provider, none of the headers can be trusted and this is why the client will be frozen (assuming headers verify). By looking at the headers we can determine the validator(s) that signed both and these should be punished. This should cover all light client attacks.

Reviewer: > By looking at the headers we can determine the validator(s) that signed both and these should be punished. This should cover all light client attacks.

This is true for equivocation, but not for lunatic. Sure, even for lunatic you end up jailing the intersection, but some malicious validators will not be punished.

Reviewer 2: but it's the best we can do, no?

Reviewer: For now yes, but we should be able to jail for lunatic attacks as well. It may be the case that the intersection for a lunatic attack is an empty set.

> ## Consequences
> - After this ADR is applied, it will be possible for the provider chain to tombstone validators who committed a light client attack.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Consequences

### Positive

- After this ADR is applied, it will be possible for the provider chain to tombstone validators who committed a light client attack.

### Negative

- N/A

```

it is referred to a “lunatic attack”. Conversely, in the opposite case, it is termed an “equivocation”, (see [CometBFT spec](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/spec/light-client/detection/detection_003_reviewed.md)).

When a light client agent detects two conflicting headers, it will initially verify their traces (see [cometBFT detector](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/2af25aea6cfe6ac4ddac40ceddfb8c8eee17d0e6/light/detector.go#L28)) using its primary and witness nodes.
If these headers pass successful verification, the Byzantine validators will be identified based on the header's commit signatures
and the type of light client attack. The agent will then transmit this information to its nodes using a [`LightClientAttackEvidence`](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/feed0ddf564e113a840c4678505601256b93a8bc/docs/architecture/adr-047-handling-evidence-from-light-client.md) to be eventually voted and committed it to a block. In this scenario, the chain's evidence module will execute the jailing and the slashing of the validators responsible for the light client attack.

> In the event of an attack against one of its light clients, the counter-party chains implement necessary measures.
> The IBC relayers facilitate a way to notify these chains of a detected light client attack by submitting an [IBC misbehavior message]((https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/2b7c969066fbcb18f90c7f5bd256439ca12535c7/proto/ibc/lightclients/tendermint/v1/tendermint.proto#L79)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Light clients are a core component of IBC.  
In the event of a light client attack, IBC relayers notify the affected chains by submitting an [IBC misbehavior message]((https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/2b7c969066fbcb18f90c7f5bd256439ca12535c7/proto/ibc/lightclients/tendermint/v1/tendermint.proto#L79)).
```

A misbehavior message includes the conflicting headers that constitute a `LightClientAttackEvidence`. Upon receiving such a message,
a chain will first verify whether these headers would have convinced its light client. This verification is achieved by checking
the header states against the light client consensus states (see [IBC misbehaviour handler](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/2b7c969066fbcb18f90c7f5bd256439ca12535c7/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/types/misbehaviour_handle.go#L101)). If the misbehaviour is successfully verified, the chain will then "freeze" the
light client, halting any further trust in or updating of its states.

## Decision

In the first iteration of the feature, we will introduce a new endpoint: `HandleConsumerMisbehaviour(ctx sdk.Context, misbehaviour ibctmtypes.Misbehaviour)`.
The main idea is to leverage the current IBC misbehaviour handling and update it to solely jail and slash the validators that
performed a light client attack. This update will be made under the assumption that the chains connected via this light client

> share the same validator set, as in the ICS context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
share the same validator set, as it is the case with Replicated Security. 
```

This endpoint will reuse the IBC client libraries to verify that the misbehaviour headers would have fool the light client.
Additionally, it’s crucial that the endpoint logic result in the slashing and jailing of validators under the same conditions
as a light client agent detector. Therefore, the endpoint will ensure that the two conditions are met:

> the misbehaviour’s header contains the same block height, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the headers in the misbehaviour message have the same block height, and
```

When an infraction occurs on the consumer, a SlashPacket containing the vscID obtained from mapping the consumer infraction height
is sent to the provider. Upon receiving the packet, the provider maps the consumer infraction height to a local infraction height,
which is used to slash the misbehaving validator. In the context of untrusted consumer chains, all their states, including vscIDs,
could be corrupted and the ore cannot be used for slashing purposes.

- Currently, the endpoint can only handle "equivocation" light client attacks. This is because the "lunatic" attacks require the endpoint to possess the ability to dissociate which header is conflicted or trusted upon receiving a misbehavior message. Without this information, it's not possible to define the Byzantine validators from the conflicting headers (see [comment](https://github.com/cosmos/interchain-security/pull/826#discussion_r1268668684)).

## Consequences

### Positive
- After this ADR is applied, it will be possible for the provider chain to tombstone validators who committed a light client attack.

### Negative

> - The misbehaviour verification process requires to copy a lot of unexposed IBC methods.

Reviewer: Is this still true? I thought we can use [CheckMisbehaviourAndUpdateState](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/8f53c21361f9d65448a850c2eafcf3ab3c384a61/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/types/misbehaviour_handle.go#L16C4-L16C35).

Author: Good point. 

[CheckMisbehaviourAndUpdateState](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/8f53c21361f9d65448a850c2eafcf3ab3c384a61/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/types/misbehaviour_handle.go#L16C4-L16C35) accepts time violations as valid misbehaivour, so I was initially thinking to rewrite it and copy all the unexposed methods.

Instead, I will just add the opposite of this [condition](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/8f53c21361f9d65448a850c2eafcf3ab3c384a61/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/types/misbehaviour_handle.go#L54-L58) before calling [CheckMisbehaviourAndUpdateState](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/8f53c21361f9d65448a850c2eafcf3ab3c384a61/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/types/misbehaviour_handle.go#L16C4-L16C35).

## References

> * [ICS misbehaviour handling PR](https://github.com/cosmos/interchain-security/pull/826/files)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [ICS misbehaviour handling PR](https://github.com/cosmos/interchain-security/pull/826)
```
